arXiv:2003.11371v3  [q-bio.PE]  19 May 2020
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 1
Mathematical Modeling of Epidemic Diseases; A
Case Study of the COVID-19 Coronavirus
Reza Sameni *
Grenoble, France
Revision: 19 May 2020
Abstract—The outbreak of the Coronavirus COVID-19 has
taken the lives of several thousands worldwide and locked-
out many countries and regions, with yet unpredictable glob al
consequences. In this research we study the epidemic patter ns of
this virus, from a mathematical modeling perspective. The s tudy
is based on an extensions of the well-known susceptible-infected-
recovered (SIR) family of compartmental models. It is shown
how social measures such as distancing, regional lockdowns ,
quarantine and global public health vigilance, inﬂuence th e model
parameters, which can eventually change the mortality rate s and
active contaminated cases over time, in the real world. As wi th all
mathematical models, the predictive ability of the model is limited
by the accuracy of the available data and to the so-called level of
abstraction used for modeling the problem. In order to provide
the broader audience of researchers a better understanding of
spreading patterns of epidemic diseases, a short introduct ion on
biological systems modeling is also presented and the Matla b
source codes for the simulations are provided online.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Since the outbreak of the Coronavirus COVID-19 in January
2020, the virus has affected most countries and taken the liv es
of several thousands of people worldwide. By March 2020,
the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the situation a
pandemic, the ﬁrst of its kind in our generation. To date, man y
countries and regions have been locked-down and applied
strict social distancing measures to stop the virus propaga tion.
From a strategic and healthcare management perspective, th e
propagation pattern of the disease and the prediction of its
spread over time is of great importance, to save lives and to
minimize the social and economic consequences of the diseas e.
Within the scientiﬁc community, the problem of interest has
been studied in various communities including mathematica l
epidemiology [ 1], [ 2], biological systems modeling [ 3], [ 4],
signal processing [ 5] and control engineering [ 6].
In this study, epidemic outbreaks are studied from
an interdisciplinary perspective, by using an extension of
the susceptible-exposed-infected-recovered (SEIR) model [ 2],
which is a mathematical compartmental model based on the
average behavior of a population under study. The objective
is to provide researchers a better understanding of the sign if-
icance of mathematical modeling for epidemic diseases. It i s
*R. Sameni is Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering at School of
Electrical & Computer Engineering, Shiraz University, Shi raz, Iran, currently
on sabbatical leave as a visiting researcher at GIPSA-lab, U niversit´ e Grenoble
Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP , 38000 Grenoble, France and a memb er of the
SEEPIA (Simulation & Estimation of Epidemics with Algorith ms) project
working group (e-mail: reza.sameni@gmail.com).
shown by simulation, how social measures such as distancing ,
regional lockdowns and public health vigilance, can inﬂuen ce
the model parameters, which in turns change the mortality
rates and active contaminated cases over time.
It should be highlighted that mathematical models applied
to real-world systems (social, biological, economical, et c.) are
only valid under their assumptions and hypothesis. Therefo re,
this research— and similar ones— that address epidemic pat-
terns, do not convey direct clinical information and danger s for
the public, but should rather be used by healthcare strategi sts
for better planning and decision making. Hence, the study of
this work is only recommended for researchers familiar with
the strength points and limitations of mathematical modeli ng
of biological systems. The Matlab codes required for repro-
ducing the results of this research are also online availabl e in
the Git repository of the project [ 7].
In Section II, a brief introduction to mathematical modeling
of biological systems is presented, to highlight the scope o f
the present study and to open perspectives for the intereste d
researchers, who may be less familiar with the context. The
proposed model for the outspread of the Coronavirus is
presented in Section III. The article is concluded with some
general remarks and future perspectives.
II. A N INTRODUCTION MATHEMATICAL EPIDEMIOLOGY
AND COMPARTMENTAL MODELING
A. Mathematical modeling
A model is an entity that resembles a system or object in
certain aspects, but is easier to work with as compared to the
original system. Models are used for the 1) identiﬁcation an d
better understanding of systems, 2) simulation of a system’ s
behavior, 3) prediction of its future behavior, and ultimat ely
4) system control. Apparently, from item 1 to 4, the problem
becomes more difﬁcult and although the ultimate objective i s
to harness or control a system, this objective is not necessa rily
achievable. While modeling is the ﬁrst and most important st ep
in this path, it is highly challenging and nontrivial. The va rious
issues that one faces in this regard, include:
• Models are not unique and different models can co-exist for
a single system.
• A model is only a slice of reality and all models have a
scope, outside of which, they are invalid.
• Modeling can be done in different levels of abstraction ,
which corresponds to the level of simpliﬁcation and the
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 2
speciﬁc aspects of the system that are considered by the
model.
Example 1. The response of global stock markets with numer-
ous economic, political, industrial, social and psycholog ical
factors, to a high impact news can in cases be modeled with
a second-order differential equation, with a step-like ove r-
damped behavior that reaches its steady state after a while.
Or in medicine, the response of the human body— with more
that thirty-seven trillion cells— to medication can in many
cases be “resonably” modeled with a ﬁrst order differential
equation.
While various types of models are used for biological sys-
tems, we are commonly interested in mathematical models [ 8],
as they permit the prediction and possible control of biolog ical
systems. In choosing among different available models, the
widely accepted principle is the model parsimony, which sim-
ply means that “a model should be as simple as possible and
as complex as necessary!” . The model parsimony, is also an
important factor for estimating the unknown model paramete rs
using real data. A more accurate model with fewer number
of parameters is evidently preferred over a less accurate an d
more complex model. But how should one select between
a more accurate complex model and a less accurate simpler
one? Measures such as the Akaike information criterion (AIC ),
the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) and the minimum
description length (MDL), address the balance between the
number of observations and the model unknown parameters
to select between competing models with variable number of
parameters and different levels of accuracy [ 9], [ 10]. Finally,
the physical interpretability of the model parameters and t he
ability to estimate the parameters such that the model match es
real-world data, is what makes the whole modeling framework
meaningful.
B. From stochastic infection propagation models to ordinar y
differential (difference) equation modeling
The outbreak of a contagious disease in a large population
is a stochastic event. Starting from a single infected indiv idual,
the infection is transmitted to others in a stochastic manne r,
either by direct contact, proximity, or environmental trac es (in-
fected objects left over in the environment). The new infect ed
generation in turns transmits the infection (again probabi listi-
cally) to the healthy individuals that they meet or encounte r.
During the primary stages of an epidemic outbreak, healthy-
infected individual encounters are statistically indepen dent. As
a result, the chance of multiple infected people meeting a
single healthy individual is probabilistically low. There fore,
assuming that each infected individual contaminates R0 new
people on average (known as the reproduction number, more
rigorously deﬁned in Section II-E), if R0 > 1 the disease
spreads exponentially from one time step to another (for
example on a daily basis). However, in a ﬁnite population,
the exponential growth can not continue for ever. Depending
on the population size and contact patterns, the probabilit y
of infected people encountering independent healthy indi-
viduals decreases. Therefore, after the initial outbreak t hat
exponentially spreads among the population, the infected
population tend to encounter each other and repeated health y
ones (the healthy individuals already contacted by another
infected person). Hence, the stochastic model of infection
propagation, somehow saturates 1. The probabilistic models
used for modeling such epidemic spread are commonly based
on the branching process and a Poisson distributions for the
probability of contact between infectious and healthy subj ects.
The stochastic perspective to epidemic modeling has been
extensively studied in the literature [ 2], [ 11]–[ 13]. Herein, we
adopt a more heuristic approach for model formation, which
is less rigorous, but is equally accurate in large populatio ns
(refer to the above references for the justiﬁcation).
Suppose that x(t) denotes the number of infected indi-
viduals of a population at time t. Next, assuming that the
chance of infection increases with the number of infected
individuals, we assume that the variations in the populatio n
of the number of infected between time t and t + ∆ (over
relatively small intervals ∆ ) is proportional to the number of
infected individuals, i.e.,
dx(t)
dt ≈ x(t + ∆) − x(t)
∆ = φ(t)x(t) (1)
Let us name φ(t) the reproduction function , which models
how the infected population evolves over time. This functio n
accounts for the expectation of various probabilistic fact ors,
such as the rate of infection transmission, population dens ity
and contact patterns. Note that although the x(t) on the right
hand side of ( 1) could have been uniﬁed in φ(t), the above
form has the advantages that φ(t) can be interpreted as the
exponential rate, with inverse time units.
Denoting the kth generation of the infection spread by xk
∆
=
x(k∆) , ( 1) can be discretized as follows:
xk+1 = [1 + ∆ φ(k∆)] xk
Now, deﬁning the reproduction number rk
∆
= [1 + ∆ φ(k∆)] ,
it is evident that the population at the discretized time ind ex
k can be recursively found from the initial condition x0:
xk = (rk− 1rk− 2 · · · r0)x0 (2)
Apparently, if for all k, rk < 1 (or equivalently φ(t) < 0),
the infection would decay to zero; otherwise if rk > 1 (or
φ(t) > 0) it spreads. In the simplest case, for which the
reproduction function is a constant φ(t) = λ, we have a
constant reproduction number R0 = 1 + λ∆ , resulting in an
exponential growth/decay:
xk = x0Rk
0, (3)
or in the continuous case:
x(t) = x(0)eλt (4)
The equivalence of the discrete and continuous solutions is
evident up to the ﬁrst order approximation of the derivative ,
as assumed in ( 1).
1Another interpretation is that after a while, it becomes mor e and more
difﬁcult for the average infected person to meet R0 non-infected individuals,
and therefore the reproduction number drops and the number o f new infections
decreases exponentially.
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 3
More generally, the reproduction function φ(t) (or rk in
the discrete case) can be a time-varying function of factors
such as the total susceptible population, the population of
the exposed individuals (carriers of the disease but withou t
symptoms), contact patterns, and countermeasures such as
social distancing and lockdowns. As shown in the sequel,
the notion of reproduction function (number) and its impact
on epidemic outbreak generalizes to eigen-analysis of vect or-
valued dynamic epidemic models (when the population is
divided into multiple groups of individuals known compart-
ments), enabling the stability analysis of such models.
As a reminder for later use, when λ < 0, the exponential
law in ( 4) implies that the population of the infected cases
drops 63%, 86%, 95%, 98%, 99%, and 99.75% from its initial
value, after λ− 1, 2λ− 1, 3λ− 1, 4λ− 1, 5λ− 1, and 6λ− 1 time
units, respectively. The latter indicates for example that after
6λ− 1 time units, only 25 cases out of 10,000 would still be
infected. This property is later used to estimate the model
parameters from clinical experimental results. It is good t o note
that although the exponential law for infection spread is th e
most common assumption, depending on the application, more
accurate non-exponential models have also been considered
[14].
C. Compartmental modeling
Differential (difference) equations arise in many modelin g
problems. The major application of these equations is when
the rate of change of a variable is related to other variables ,
as it is so in most physical and biological systems. Many
powerful mathematical tools exist for the analysis and (nu-
merical) solution of models based on differential equation s.
Despite their vast applications, differential equations a re dif-
ﬁcult to conceive and interpret without visualization. In t his
context, compartmental models are used as a visual means
of representing differential equations of dynamic systems . A
compartment is an abstract entity representing the quantit y
of interest (volume, number, density, etc.). Depending on t he
level of abstraction, each of the variables of interest (equ ivalent
to system states in dynamic systems) are represented by
a single compartment, conceptually represented by a box.
Each compartment is assumed to be internally homogeneous,
which implies that all entities assumed inside the compartm ent
are indistinguishable. For example, depending on the model
complexity selected for modeling a certain epidemic diseas e,
men and women at risk can be assumed to conform a single
compartment, or may alternatively be considered as differe nt
compartments. A similar partitioning may be considered for
different age groups, ethnicities, countries, etc., at a co st of a
more complex (less parsimonious) model with additional sta tes
and parameters to be identiﬁed. Apparently, the available r eal-
world data may be insufﬁcient for the parameter identiﬁcati on
of a more detailed (complex) model.
The compartments interact with one another through a set
of rate equations, visually represented by arrows between
the compartments. Therefore, compartmental models can be
converted to a set of ﬁrst order linear or nonlinear equation s
(and vice versa), by writing the net ﬂow into a compartment.
Compartmental modeling is also known as mass transport
[15], or mass action [16], in other contexts. More technically, a
compartmental model is a weighted directed graph represen-
tation of a dynamic system. Each compartment corresponds
to a node of the graph and the linking arrows are the graph
edges. From this perspective, for an n compartment system,
the compartment variables can be considered as state variab les
denoted in vector form as x(t) = [ x1(t), . . . , xn(t)]T . The
compartmental model provides a graphical representation o f
the state-space model:
˙x(t) = f (x(t), w(t); θ (t), t)
y(t) = g(x(t); θ (t), t) + v(t) (5)
where f (·) is the state dynamics function corresponding to
the compartmental model graph (which can be possibly time-
variant and nonlinear), w(t) = [ w1(t), . . . , wl(t)]T represents
deterministic or stochastic external system inputs, y(t) =
[y1(t), . . . , ym(t)]T is the vector of observable model vari-
ables considered as outputs (the measurements), g(·) if the
function that maps the state variables to the observations
(measurements), v(t) = [ v1(t), . . . , vm(t)]T is the vector of
measurement inaccuracies, considered as additive noise an d
θ (t) = [ θ1(t), . . . , θp(t)]T is a vector of model parameters
to be set or identiﬁed. Researchers familiar with estimatio n
theory, have already guessed that the state-space form of
(5), implies that one may eventually be able to estimate and
predict the compartment variables from noisy measurements ,
using state-space estimation techniques, such as the Kalma n
or extended Kalman ﬁlter [ 17].
With this background, the basic steps of compartmental
modeling are:
1) Identifying the quantities of interest as distinct compa rt-
ments and selecting a variable for each quantity as a
function of time. These variables are the state variables
of the resulting state-space equations .
2) Linking the compartments with arrows indicating the rate
of quantity ﬂow from each compartment to another (visu-
ally denoted over the arrows connecting the compartments).
3) Writing the corresponding ﬁrst-order (linear or nonline ar)
differential equations for each of the state variables of th e
model. In writing the equations from the graph represen-
tation, the edge weights multiplied by the state variable
of their start node are added to (subtracted from) the rate
change equation of the end node (start node). External
inputs can be considered to be originated from an external
node with value 1.
4) Setting initial conditions and solving the system of equa -
tions (either analytically or numerically), which is in the
form of a ﬁrst-order state-space model.
A compartmental model is linear (nonlinear), when its rate
ﬂow factors are independent (dependent) of the state variab les.
A compartmental model is time-invariant (time-variant), when
its rate ﬂow factors are independent (dependent) of time. Co m-
partmental models may be open or closed. In closed systems,
the quantities are only passed between the compartments,
while in open systems the quantities may ﬂow into or out
of the whole system. In a closed compartmental model, the
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 4
x
y
zu
α β
γx
ρ
Fig. 1. A sample compartmental model corresponding to the se t of dynamic
equations in ( 6)
sum of all the differential equations of the system is zero (f or
all t).
Example 2. A three compartment model corresponding to the
following set of equations is shown in Fig. 1.
dx(t)
dt = u − γx(t)2 − αx(t)
dy(t)
dt = αx(t) − βy(t)
dz(t)
dt = γx(t)2 + βy(t) − ρz(t)
(6)
which can be put in the matrix form of ( 5). Due to the state-
dependency of the rate ﬂow between x and z, the model is
nonlinear. It is also an open system, since the sum of rate
changes is non-zero, i.e., there is net ﬂow in and out of the
whole system (due to u and ρ).
D. Mathematical epidemiology
In order to model the propagation of epidemic diseases in a
population, certain disease- and population-speciﬁc assu mp-
tions are required. The most common assumptions in this
context include:
• The diseases are contagious and transfer via contact.
• A disease may or may not be fatal.
• There may be births during the period of study, and the
birth may (or may not) be congenitally transferred from the
mother to the baby.
• The disease can have an exposure period, during which the
contaminants carry and spread the disease, but do not have
visible symptoms.
• Catching the disease may or may not result in short-term or
long-term immunity. Depending on the case, the recovered
patients can again become susceptible to the disease.
• Interventions such as medication, vaccination, lockdown,
quarantine and social distancing can change the pattern of
propagation.
Let us consider an example, which is the basic model that we
later extend for the COVIC-19 virus propagation pattern.
1) The susceptible-infected-recovered model: A basic
model used for modeling epidemic diseases without lifetime
immunity is known as the susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR)
model [ 2], [ 18], [ 19]. In this model, the total population of
N individuals exposed to an epidemic disease at each time
instant t is divided into three groups (each represented by a
compartment): the susceptible group fraction denoted by s(t),
the infected group fraction denoted by i(t), and the recovered
group fraction denoted by r(t) (the compartment variables are
s i rβαi
γ
Fig. 2. The basic susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) mo del
in fact the fraction of each group’s population divided by N ).
Accordingly, the system is closed and we have
s(t) + i(t) + r(t) = 1 (7)
A compartmental model for the propagation of the disease is
shown in Fig. 2. The compartmental representation of Fig. 2
is equivalent to the following set of differential equation s:
ds(t)
dt = −αs(t)i(t) + γr(t)
di(t)
dt = αs(t)i(t) − βi(t)
dr(t)
dt = βi(t) − γr(t)
(8)
Accordingly, moving from the susceptible group to the in-
fected group takes place at a rate that is proportional to the
population of the infected and susceptible groups, with pa-
rameter α. At the same time, infected individuals are assumed
to recover at a constant rate of β. Finally, considering that
the disease is not assumed to result in lifetime immunity
of the subjects, the recovered individuals again return to t he
susceptible group at a ﬁxed rate of γ. From ( 8), it is evident
that
ds(t)
dt + di(t)
dt + dr(t)
dt = 0 (9)
which is in accordance with ( 7) and the fact that the system
is assumed to be closed (no births or deaths have been
considered).
Assuming initial conditions for each group, the set of
nonlinear equations ( 8) can be (numerically) solved to ﬁnd the
evolution of the population of each compartment over time.
The numerical solution of a basic (non-fatal) SIR model is
shown in Fig. 3, with and without lifetime immunity. The time-
step for numerical discretizing of the differential equati ons of
this simulation has been chosen to be ∆ =0.1 of a day. Notice
how the outbreak of a disease that does not cause lifetime
immunity (such as a typical ﬂu), can result in a constant
rate of illness throughout time, after its transient period . For
widespread epidemic diseases, the healthcare strategists are in-
terested in the slopes of s(t), i(t) and r(t), rather than the total
number of infected individuals (as it is currently the case f or
the COVID-19 Coronavirus). The prolongation of the disease
spread provides the better management of healthcare resour ces
such as hospitalization, medication, healthcare personne l, etc.
For later reference, it is interesting to study the ﬁxed-point
of the SIR model (where ˙s(t) = ˙i(t) = ˙r(t) = 0 ). Equating
the left sides of ( 8) with zero, it can be algebraically shown
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 5
0 50 100 150
days
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Population Ratio
S(t)
I(t)
R(t)
(a) Basic SIR with immunity
0 50 100 150
days
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Population Ratio
S(t)
I(t)
R(t)
(b) Basic SIR without immunity
Fig. 3. Simulation of a basic non-fatal SIR model with α =0.5 and β =0.05
in two cases: a) γ =0.0 (lifetime immunity) and b) γ =0.04
that if α, γ ⁄= 0 (the non-immunizing case), the SIR model
has only two ﬁxed-points:
(s∗ (t), i∗ (t), r∗ (t)) = (1 , 0, 0)
(s∗ (t), i∗ (t), r∗ (t)) = ( β
α , I0, β
γ I0) (10)
where I0
∆
= γ(α − β)
α(γ + β) . The ﬁrst ﬁxed-point corresponds to the
lack of any infected cases, and the second corresponds to a
persistent disease in the population, as illustrated in Fig . 3(b).
This situation is only reachable if β < α , i.e., when the
infection rate is greater than the recovery rate.
We can also verify whether or not the ﬁxed-points are
stable. V arious methods can be used for this purpose. Perhap s,
the most tangible approach is based on perturbation theory .
Simply stated, one can add small perturbations to the ﬁxed-
points of the system and check whether or not the perturbatio ns
are compensated by the system’s dynamics by pushing the
state vector back to its ﬁxed-point. Accordingly, the ﬁrst ﬁ xed-
point in ( 10) can be perturbed to:
(s(t), i(t), r(t)) = (1 − ǫ, ǫ, 0) (11)
where 0 < ǫ ≪ 1 is a small perturbation (e.g., equivalent to
a single case of disease outbreak in a large population). Now
replacing the perturbed point in ( 8) and neglecting second and
higher order terms containing ǫ, we obtain:
ds(t)
dt = −α(1 − ǫ)ǫ ≈ −αǫ < 0
di(t)
dt = α(1 − ǫ)ǫ − βǫ ≈ (α − β)ǫ
dr(t)
dt = βǫ > 0
(12)
As a result, the ﬁrst ﬁxed-point is unstable, since due to the
sign of the derivatives of the perturbed system, the system’ s
dynamics drives the state vector away from the ﬁxed-point
(since the population of the susceptible group has a negativ e
derivative). However, depending on whether α > β or not, the
outbreak may or may not result in an increase in the infected
population. Simply put, if the infection rate is greater tha n
the recovery rate ( α > β ) the disease would lead into an
outspread; but if the recovery rate is faster than the infect ion
rate ( α < β ) the percentage of the infected population
will remain close to zero. In either case, for a non-fatal
non-immunizing disease, all individuals that become infec ted
recover after a while and move to the recovered group and
again go back to the susceptible group at a rate of γ. Note
that a SIR model with a non-zero infected population fractio n
in steady-state, indicates that there is a constant ﬂow betw een
the compartments, i.e., people are constantly contaminate d,
recovered and again become susceptible to the disease.
Perturbing the second ﬁxed-point results in
ds(t)
dt = −α( β
α − ǫ)(I0 + ǫ) + βI0 ≈ ǫ(αI0 − β)
di(t)
dt = α( β
α − ǫ)(I0 + ǫ) − βI0 ≈ −ǫ(αI0 − β)
dr(t)
dt = β(I0 + ǫ) − β(I0 + ǫ) = 0
(13)
In this case, depending on whether (αI0 − β) > 0 or not, the
ﬁxed-point may be stable or unstable.
For later use, we can show that during the outbreak of the
SIR model ( s(t) ≈ 1), the number of infected cases follows
an exponential pattern:
i(t) ≈ i(0) exp[(α − β)t] (14)
2) The fatal SIR model: A fatal version of the SIR model
with rates of birth µ∗ and with different death rates from the
susceptible ( µs), infected ( µi) and recovered ( µr) groups is
shown in Fig. 4. This system is no longer closed and its state
equations can be written as follows:
ds(t)
dt = γr(t) − αs(t)i(t) − µss(t) + µ∗
di(t)
dt = αs(t)i(t) − βi(t) − µii(t)
dr(t)
dt = βi(t) − γr(t) − µrr(t)
(15)
E. The basic reproduction number (R0)
As noted before, the outbreak threshold of epidemiology
models is known as the basic reproduction number R0. It is
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 6
s i rβαi
γµ∗
µs µi µr
Fig. 4. The susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model wi th birth and death
rates
deﬁned as the average number of secondary infections due
to an infected individual hosted by a completely susceptibl e
population [ 20]–[ 22], [ 1, Ch. 7]. The R0 during epidemic
outbreak is generally greater than the average infections ( R)
at any other time other than the outbreak.
From the mathematical modeling perspective, a formal
deﬁnition of R0 was ﬁrst presented in [ 23]. Consider the
general dynamic representation of a compartmental model:
˙x(t) = f (x(t)) (16)
where x(t) = [ x1(t), x2(t), . . . , xp(t), xp+1(t), . . . , xn(t)]T
is the state vector (compartment variables), such that
x1(t), . . . , xp(t) correspond to the infected compartments (ex-
posed, infected, etc.), and xp+1(t), . . . , xn(t) are all the other
variables (susceptibles, recovered, passed-away, etc.). We next
partition each row of f (·) as follows:
f (x(t)) = F (x(t)) + V(x(t)) (17)
where F (·) groups all the terms of f (x(t)), which correspond
to new infections (the portion of the population, which are
either susceptible or had fully recovered, but are becoming
exposed or infected due to contact with the exposed or
infected). On the other hand, V(·) groups all the other terms
of the equations, including removals from the infected grou ps
and other compartmental transitions.
The Jacobian of F (·) and V(·) are next calculated at the no
infection ﬁxed-point x∗ = [0, 0, . . . ,0, x∗
p+1, . . . , x∗
n]T :
∇xF (x∗ ) =
[ F 0
0 0
]
, ∇xV(x∗ ) =
[ V 0
J3 J4
]
(18)
Finally, the reproduction number is deﬁned as the spectral
radius (leading eigenvalue) of the negative of the so-calle d
next generation matrix (NGM) FV− 1:
R0 = ρ(−FV− 1) (19)
which is proved to have the biological properties of the
reproduction number for epidemic studies.
In fact, while the threshold between stability and instabil ity
of an epidemic can be deﬁned in various forms, only the
deﬁnition based on R0 is biologically popular [ 22]. In [ 23],
it is also shown how different partitionings of the state-sp ace
model can lead to different spectral radii; however, only th e
choice described in ( 17) leads to the biologically meaningful
deﬁnition of R0.
Example 3. In the SIR model ( 8), if we replace r(t) = 1 −
s(t) − i(t) from ( 7), the model reduces to:
di(t)
dt = αs(t)i(t) − βi(t)
ds(t)
dt = −αs(t)i(t) + γ[1 − s(t) − i(t)]
(20)
Therefore,
F =
[ αs(t)i(t)
0
]
, V =
[ −βi(t)
−αs(t)i(t) + γ[1 − s(t) − i(t)]
]
(21)
and at the ﬁxed-point x = (0, 1)
∇xF (x∗ ) =
[ αs(t) αi(t)
0 0
]
i(t)=0,s (t)=1
∇xV(x∗ ) =
[ −β 0
−αs(t) − γ −αi(t) − γ
]
i(t)=0,s (t)=1
(22)
which results in the reproduction number:
R0 = ρ(−FV− 1) = α
β (23)
where we can see that the epidemic stability condition R0 < 1
is identical to the stability condition α < β , found for the SIR
model in Section II-D1.
Comparing ( 23) and ( 14) we notice that although the
epidemic stability condition found from R0 is related to the
outbreak exponent (slope of infection during outbreak), bu t
they are not the same quantities.
In fact, a major drawback of the conventional deﬁnition
of R0 using the NGM is that the discretization time (or
generation period) is discarded in its deﬁnition and theref ore,
there is no direct analogy between the discrete-time and
continuous-time outbreak behavior of the epidemic. Motiva ted
by this fact and based on the analogy between the discrete-
time and continuous-time models presented in Section II-B,
we hereby propose an alternative deﬁnition of the reproduct ion
number:
Proposition: An alternative deﬁnition of the repro-
duction number is
˜R0 = eλ 1∆ (24)
where λ1 is the real-part of the dominant eigenvalue
of the dynamic model’s Jacobian evaluated at the
ﬁxed-point of interest, and ∆ is the generation time
unit (or discretization period). Accordingly, for an
irreducible dynamic model, ˜R0 < 1 (or λ1 < 0)
and ˜R0 > 1 (or λ1 > 0) correspond to stable and
unstable epidemic conditions, respectively.
It is clear that for small generation time units ∆ (small as
compared with the compartmental model “rate of variations”
in time), we have:
˜R0 ≈ 1 + λ1∆ (25)
The major advantage of the above deﬁnition for the reproduc-
tion number is that the time unit between generations appear s
in the deﬁnition. Therefore, the ˜R0 of different epidemics that
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 7
have been experimentally obtained from real-world data ac-
quired with different generation time units become compara ble
with one another. Moreover, our studies on various epidemic
models shows that the stability condition λ1 < 0 (or ˜R0 < 1)
is exactly equivalent to the R0 < 1 condition obtained from
the common deﬁnition of the basic reproduction number using
the NGM. The mathematical proof of equivalence of the two
conditions remains as future work.
III. P ROPOSED EPIDEMIC MODEL I
Many infectious diseases are characterized by an incuba-
tion period between exposure and the outbreak of clinical
symptoms. Subjects exposed to the infection are much more
dangerous for the public as compared to the subjects showing
clinical symptoms. The condition becomes more and more
dangerous, with the increase of the isncubation rate. A well -
known case is the HIV virus in its clinical latency stage.
The experience of the COVID-19 shows that a two-week
incubation period can spread a virus worldwide and almost
at any level of the society. Remember that any two of us
are only six handshakes apart! 2 For this reason, an additional
compartment is added between the susceptibility and infect ion
stages of the SIR model, which accounts for the asymptomatic
exposed subjects. Moreover, since we are also interested in
minimizing the mortality rate of the disease, a termination
compartment is dedicated to the passed-away population. Th e
variables of the model are therefore:
1) s(t): The susceptible population fraction (the number of
individuals in danger of being infected, divided by the tota l
population).
2) e(t): The exposed population fraction (the number of indi-
viduals exposed to the virus but without having symptoms,
divided by the total population).
3) i(t): The infected population fraction (the number of
infected individuals with symptoms, divided by the total
population).
4) r(t): The recovered population fraction (the number of
recovered individuals, divided by the total population).
5) p(t): The number of individuals that pass away due to the
disease, divided by the total population).
Keeping in mind that
s(t) + e(t) + i(t) + r(t) + p(t) = 1 (26)
the proposed model and its compartmental representation ar e
shown in equations ( 27) and Fig. 5.
Model I:
ds(t)
dt = −αes(t)e(t) − αis(t)i(t) + γr(t)
de(t)
dt = αes(t)e(t) + αis(t)i(t) − κe(t) − ρe(t)
di(t)
dt = κe(t) − βi(t) − µi(t)
dr(t)
dt = βi(t) + ρe(t) − γr(t)
dp(t)
dt = µi(t)
(27)
s
e i r
p
βκ
ραee + αii
γ
µ
Fig. 5. Proposed Model I: the fatal susceptible-exposed-in fected-recovered
(SEIR) model for Coronavirus modeling with a unique recover y group
In (27), similar to the classical SIR model, the interpretation
of the nonlinear terms including s(t)e(t) and s(t)i(t) is that
the rate of exposure to the virus is proportional the populat ion
of both the susceptible and exposed/infected subjects.
Note that the system closure constraint ( 26) gives an excess
degree of freedom, which can be used to reduce the model
order by replacing s(t) = 1 − e(t) − i(t) − r(t) − p(t). This
simpliﬁes the compartmental model as follows:
de(t)
dt = [1 − e(t) − i(t) − r(t) − p(t)][αee(t) + αii(t)]
− κe(t) − ρe(t)
di(t)
dt = κe(t) − βi(t) − µi(t)
dr(t)
dt = βi(t) + ρe(t) − γr(t)
dp(t)
dt = µi(t)
(28)
A. Measurements model
Among the state variables of the proposed model, all
except e(t) are directly measurable (with potential errors). The
measurements can be formulated in matrix form as follows:


I(t)
R(t)
P (t)

 =


0 1 0 0
0 0 1 0
0 0 0 1




e(t)
i(t)
r(t)
p(t)

 +


vi(t)
vr(t)
vp(t)

 (29)
where I(t) is the fraction of reported infections, R(t) is
the fraction of reported recoveries (both symptomatic and
asymptomatic), P (t) is the fraction of reported death tolls,
and v(t) = [ vi(t), vr(t), vp(t)]T is measurement noise . The
evident sources of measurement noises include: unavailabl e
information regrading the exact population, intentional a nd
unintentional misreported values, mis-classiﬁed reasons of
death (especially for the elderly or subjects suffering fro m
multiple health issues), and the marginal cases that may be
unknown or misclassiﬁed for the healthcare system. Equatio n
(29) can be written in more compact form as follows:
y(t) = Cx(t) + v(t) (30)
where x(t) = [ e(t), i(t), r(t), p(t)]T is the reduced state-
vector. Although the variable e(t) is not directly measurable
from the available public data, we will show in Section V
2Cf. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Six degrees of separation
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 8
that under certain conditions, e(t) can be estimated from the
measurements.
Note that in the above measurement model, it is assumed
that R(t) is the total recovery fraction of both the symptomatic
and asymptomatic cases, assuming that the asymptomatic re-
coveries are measurable by (random or systematic) public te sts
over the population, such as the antibody tests that have been
conducted by some nations during the COVID-19 outbreak.
In Section IV, the model is modiﬁed to a more practical case,
in which only the recoveries due to the symptomatic cases are
measured.
B. Model assumptions and level of abstraction
The simplifying assumptions behind the proposed model
are:
1) The model variables are assumed to be continuous in both
amplitude and time.
2) Birth and natural deaths have been neglected. Therefore,
other parameters leading to changes in the population are
not considered. Neglecting the birth rate is also supported
by the current ﬁndings that babies are not susceptible to
this virus and to the best of our knowledge, no congenital
transmissions of the virus from mothers to fetuses have
been reported.
3) In the current study, we do not distinguish between male
and female subjects; although the current global toll of the
virus suggests that men have been more vulnerable to the
virus than women.
4) Age ranges have not been considered; although we known
that higher aged subjects are more vulnerable to the virus
and countries have different population pyramids .
5) Moreover, in this primary version, we have not yet consid-
ered the possibility of vaccination.
6) Geopolitical factors such as distance, country borders a nd
continental differences have also been ignored. But con-
sidering that different countries have adopted customized
countermeasures against the virus spread, the model pa-
rameters are ﬁtted over country-level data.
C. Model parameters
Having formed the model, we now explain its parameters
and their relationship with real-world factors and clinica l
protocols. The techniques for estimating and ﬁtting these
parameters on real data is later detailed in Section VI.
Note that all the model parameters have the dimension of
inverse time, to balance the left and right side dimensions
of ( 27), and that the studied model is essentially based on
an exponential law assumption, as detailed in Section II-B.
Therefore, we can ﬁnd rules of thumb for selecting the model
parameters based on clinical facts and protocols.
• κ: The rate at which symptoms appear in exposed cases,
resulting in transition from the exposed to the infected
population. The selection of this parameter is according to
the exponential law detailed in Section II-B. Assume that we
are dealing with an extremely contagious disease for which
the healthcare decision makers have agreed on the above
noted 99.75% percentage as the target infection drop-out
threshold, and advised 14 days of quarantine for the whole
population. In that case, we can select κ = 6 /14 = 0 .43
(inverse days) in our model. Apparently, there is a lot of
simpliﬁcations in this discussion; the age range, the subje ct-
speciﬁc body immune system features, the severeness of
the virus and many more factors have been neglected. But
it gives an idea about how the parameters can be tuned
in practice, up to a reasonable order of magnitude. With
this background, we now explain the interpretation of each
parameter of the model.
We should add that wide screening policies adopted by
certain countries are external factors that can signiﬁcant ly
accelerate the identiﬁcation of the infected cases. In this
case, screening is a factor that increases κ.
• αi: The contagion factor between the infected and suscepti-
ble populations, which is related to the contagiousness of t he
virus and social factors such as personal hygiene, populati on
density and level of human interactions. In order to ﬁnd the
range (or order of magnitude) of this parameter, we can start
with the contagion factors of more known viruses, such as
ﬂu and inﬂuenza, which are more or less inﬂuenced by the
same spreading factors.
• αe: The contagion factor between the exposed and suscepti-
ble populations. This parameter is logically far greater th an
αi, since in ordinary conditions (before lockdowns and quar-
antine), people rarely avoid contact with an asymptomatic
individual; nor does the individual itself avoid interacti on
with others.
• γ: The reinfection rate, or the rate of returning from the
recovered group to the susceptible group. This happens for
the cases that the body does not develop lifetime immunity
after recovery, or the virus itself starts to mutate over
time. This parameter is the inverse of the immunity rate
of the virus. It is currently too early to comment about the
immunity characteristics of the Coronavirus 3. Although at
least one case of reinfection soon after recovery has been
reported, preliminary research have suggested short-term
immunity of up to four months.
• β: The recovery rate of the infected cases. By considering
the fourth equation in ( 27), we can denote the change in
the number of hospitalized recoveries (or under control
in any form, e.g., under home-care) by rh, resulting in
rh(t + ∆) − rh(t) ≈ ∆ βi(t), where ∆ is the time unit of
approximation (for example 1 day). Therefore, the paramete r
β can be approximated by dividing the daily recovery count
of the population under study, by the total infected cases
in the same day. In the real world, apart from the body
strength of the infected subject in resisting against the vi rus,
this parameter depends on the healthcare infrastructure of a
country (hospitalization facilities, availability of med ication,
number of intensive care units, etc.).
• ρ: The recovery rate of the exposed cases (the cases that
are exposed, but recover without any symptoms). This
3Refer to:
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/
who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-ﬁnal-report. pdf
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 9
parameter is not directly measurable from pure observation s
and requires lab-based experiments. However, we logically
expect this parameter to be of the same order or greater than
the parameter β (the recovery rate of the infected population
with symptoms).
• µ: The mortality rate of the infected cases. By approximat-
ing the last equation in ( 27) by p(t + ∆) − p(t) ≈ ∆ µi(t),
where ∆ is the time unit of approximation (for example
1 day), the parameter µ can be approximated by dividing
the daily death toll by the total infected cases in the same
day. As with β, the mortality of the virus itself, the immune
system of the subjects, and the medical infrastructure are
important factors that inﬂuence the parameter.
• e0: The initial exposed population (seed).
By studying the above factors, we can see that the only
parameters of the model that can be changed in the short-
term (before the development of long-term solutions such
as vaccination, medication, improvement of hospitalizati on
facilities, etc.), is to reduce the infection rates by minim izing
human contacts (social distancing), or to apply public scre en-
ing. These are the two policies, which have been adopted
worldwide.
D. Fixed-point analysis
As with the basic SIR model presented in Example II-D1,
the ﬁxed-point(s) of the model can be sought by letting the le ft
hand sides of all equations in ( 27) equal to zero. Accordingly,
assuming that all the model parameters are nonzero, the only
ﬁxed-point is the no-disease case ( i(t) = e(t) = r(t) = 0 ):
(s∗ (t), e∗ (t), i∗ (t), r∗ (t), p∗ (t)) = (1 − p0, 0, 0, 0, p0) (31)
where 0 ≤ p0 ≤ 1 is the steady-state total death fraction. The
stability of this ﬁxed-point can be addressed by perturbing the
ﬁxed-point with a minor exposure ǫ (which can correspond to
a single new exposed case in the real world):
(s(t), e(t), i(t), r(t), p(t)) = (1 − p0 − ǫ, ǫ, 0, 0, p0) (32)
Putting this point in the state dynamics ( 27), we ﬁnd:
ds(t)
dt = −αe(1 − p0 − ǫ)ǫ ≈ −αe(1 − p0)ǫ < 0
de(t)
dt = αe(1 − p0 − ǫ)ǫ − κǫ − ρǫ ≈ (αe − αep0 − κ − ρ)ǫ
di(t)
dt = κǫ > 0
dr(t)
dt = ρǫ > 0
dp(t)
dt = 0
(33)
which is unstable, i.e., the system’s dynamics drives it awa y
from the ﬁxed-point in the direction of reducing the healthy
cases, resulting in further infection. A more rigorous stud y of
the system stability conditions is presented in the followi ng
sections using eigenanalysis.
E. Model analysis during outbreak
Let us study the model during the initial outbreak of the
epidemic, when the infection toll is still much smaller than
the total population. For instance, suppose that a country
has 100,000 of exposed or infected cases, which is indeed
signiﬁcant for any country, as it is far beyond the available
number of intensive care unit beds of even the most developed
countries4. But for a 100 million population country, such an
exposure/infection toll is only 0.1% of the total populatio n.
Therefore, during the primary phases of the disease spread,
the model can be simpliﬁed by assuming that the susceptible
population is almost constant ( s(t) ≈ 1) and ds(t)/dt ≈ 0, re-
gardless of the other parameters of the model. This assumpti on
practically implies that the total population is not import ant
during an epidemic outbreak (in low percentages of infectio n),
resulting in
Result 1. In low percentages of infection, the per-
formance of epidemic control policies of states,
countries, and regions should not be evaluated by
normalizing the infection/recovery/death tolls to their
total population; but rather the net values should be
compared.
This result has also been approved in previous research
based on model ﬁtting on data from several epidemic diseases ,
showing that the disease spread is considerably independen t
of the total population size [ 20].
Under this assumption, ( 27) is simpliﬁed to the linear set
of equations:


de(t)
dt
di(t)
dt
dr(t)
dt
dp(t)
dt


≈


αe − κ − ρ α i 0 0
κ −β − µ 0 0
ρ β −γ 0
0 µ 0 0




e(t)
i(t)
r(t)
p(t)


(34)
Deﬁning x(t) = [ e(t), i(t), r(t), p(t)]T , ( 34) can be written in
matrix form: d
dt x(t) = Ax(t) (35)
where A is the 4 ×4 state matrix on the right hand side of ( 34).
Equation ( 35) can be solved for an arbitrary initial condition,
such as x(0) = ( e0, 0, 0, 0). The characteristic function of this
linear system is:
|λI − A| = λ(λ + γ)[λ2 + (β + µ − δ)λ − δ(β + µ) − καi] = 0
(36)
where δ
∆
= ( αe − κ − ρ). Therefore the system’s eigenvalues
are:
λ1 = δ − β − µ +
√
(δ + β + µ)2 + 4καi
2
λ2 = δ − β − µ −
√
(δ + β + µ)2 + 4καi
2
λ3 = 0, λ 4 = −γ
(37)
4See for example:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00134-012-2627-8/tables/2
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 10
which are all real-valued. Moreover, it is straightforward to
check that λ1 > δ > λ 2. The eigenvectors corresponding to
each eigenvalue are:
v1 = k1[1, λ1 − δ
αi
, ραi + β(λ1 − δ)
αi(λ1 + γ) , µ(λ1 − δ)
αiλ1
]T
v2 = k2[1, λ2 − δ
αi
, ραi + β(λ2 − δ)
αi(λ2 + γ) , µ(λ2 − δ)
αiλ2
]T
v3 = [0, 0, 0, k3]T , v4 = [0, 0, k4, 0]T
(38)
where k1, k2, k3 and k4 are arbitrary constants. The general
form of the solution of the compartmental variables is a
summation of exponential terms with the above exponential
rates and eivenvectors:
x(t) =
4∑
k=1
akeλ ktvk (39)
Speciﬁcally, after some algebraic simpliﬁcations, we can c al-
culate the infected and exposed populations as follows:
i(t) = e0(λ1 − δ)(δ − λ2)
αi(λ1 − λ2) [exp (λ1t) − exp (λ2t)]
e(t) = e0
λ1 − λ2
[(λ1 − δ) exp (λ2t) + (δ − λ2) exp (λ1t)]
(40)
From the last equation in ( 27), it is clear that the death toll
will not stop before i(t) = 0 . Also from ( 40), we can see that
since λ1 is the dominant eigenvalue, the steady-state behavior
and whether or not i(t) and e(t) diverge from or converge to
zero, depends on the sign of λ1. The necessary and sufﬁcient
condition for the linearized system’s stability (stopping the
death doll) is λ1 < 0, which simpliﬁes to καi + δ(β + µ) < 0,
or:
καi < (κ + ρ − αe)(β + µ) (41)
A sufﬁcient condition that guarantees this property is when
αi = αe = 0 . The condition αi = 0 implies that the
susceptible group avoids contact with the infected ones. Ho w-
ever, the second condition ( αe = 0 ) is difﬁcult to fulﬁll
in the real-world, since the exposed group do not have any
symptoms. This is why social distancing is required to enfor ce
αe ≈ 0 and to permit all the exposed subjects to move to the
infected group without infecting new individuals, after wh ich
the asymptomatic group can be all considered clear of the
disease. Another practical case is when αi ≈ 0 (healthy people
avoid contact with the infected) and κ + ρ > α e (the rate of
recovery of the exposed or the appearance of their symptoms
is faster than the rate of new exposures). This condition is
fulﬁlled by social distancing and lockdown (isolation of ev en
the asymptomatic cases for a certain period).
However, if none of the above conditions are fulﬁlled and
λ1 > 0, the number of exposed and infected cases increases
exponentially at a rate of λ1. In this case, with ﬁxed system
parameters, the infection rate rises exponentially up to a p oint
at which the linear approximation does no longer hold. This
practically translates into:
Result 2. During an exponential outbreak of an
epidemic ( λ1 > 0), the system is unstable and with-
out enforcing temporary lockdowns, social distancing
and quarantine of the infected cases (resulting in the
model parameter changes), the exponential increase
in the number of infected subjects continues to a
point where a signiﬁcant percentage of the popula-
tion is infected.
Using the method detailed in Section II-E, we can further
show that for the epidemic model ( 27), the reproduction
number (spectral radius of the NGM) is equal to:
R0 = αe(β + µ) + καi
(κ + ρ)(β + µ) (42)
Apparently, R0 < 1 exactly simpliﬁes to the stability condition
in ( 41), when λ1 < 0.
Result 3. Under countermeasures, the model eigen-
values change and λ1 (the dominant eigenvalue of the
linearized dynamic model) is the single parameter
that can be tracked as a score for evaluating how
good countermeasures such as social distancing and
quarantine are performing.
Considering that the death toll p(t) is composed of the same
exponential terms as the infected cases in ( 40), the above result
is indeed disturbing.
It is also interesting to observe from ( 40 ) that the population
of the different compartments of the model is only linearly
proportional to the initial exposed population size e05. There-
fore, for a large population (at the level of a populated city or
country), the initial infected seed size is not as important as the
other model parameters that inﬂuence the exponential behav ior
of the model (such as the social contact rates). Therefore:
Result 4. The initial seed size is not the most critical
parameter for epidemic management. Regions with
smaller initial seeds of infected/exposed cases may
end up with a higher infected and death toll depend-
ing on their infection rates, deﬁned by factors such
as human-contact rate and personal hygiene.
Another interesting property is to check the ratio between
the number of infected (which is measurable in the real world )
and the number of exposed (which is not directly measurable) .
From ( 40), we can ﬁnd 6:
i(t)
e(t) = exp(˜λ1t) − exp(−˜λ2t)
αi[˜λ− 1
1 exp(˜λ1t) + ˜λ− 1
2 exp(−˜λ2t)]
(43)
where ˜λ1
∆
= λ1 − δ and ˜λ2
∆
= δ − λ2 are both positive.
Therefore, when the terms containing exp(−˜λ2t), which is
a decaying exponential, vanish and the epidemic model is sti ll
5Note that the COVID-19 is believed to have started from a sing le case.
6The numerator and denominator of ( 43) have been multiplied by exp(− δt)
to obtain the simpliﬁed form.
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 11
in its linear phase ( i(t) ≪ s(t) or s(t) ≈ 1), the ratio can be
approximated by:
i(t)
e(t) →
˜λ1
αi
for t ≫ ˜λ− 1
2 and i(t) ≪ s(t) (44)
which gives the following practical result:
Result 5. During the primary phases of an epidemic
outbreak (when the number of contaminated cases
has an exponential growth, but the percentage of
the infected individuals to the total population is
still small), the number of exposed subjects can be
approximated by e(t) ≈ αi˜λ− 1
1 i(t), permitting its
estimation from i(t).
F . Repeated waves of epidemic
The peaks of the infected group population, and its potentia l
repetition in time, is important from the strategic viewpoi nt
[24]. These points correspond to local or global extremums of
i(t), which mathematically correspond to where di(t)/dt = 0
in ( 27), i.e., where i(t) = κe(t)/(β + µ). It can be shown
that this leads to a reduced order set of nonlinear dynamic
equations, which can be solved for the remaining variables
[s(t), e(t), r(t), p(t)]T . The simulations demonstrated in the
sequel, show that the infected population can have multiple
local peaks over time, with recurrent behaviors, proving th at:
Result 6. The epidemic disease can repeat pseudo-
periodically over time (in later seasons or years)
and turn into a persistent disease in the long term.
The amplitude and time gap of the infection peaks
depends on the model parameters.
This behavior has been observed in previous pandemics,
such as the 1918 pandemic inﬂuenza, known as the Spanish ﬂu ,
where three pandemic waves of infection have been observed
within an interval of a few months 7. A mathematical study
of sustained oscillations of similar compartmental models has
been studied in previous research [ 19], [ 25].
IV. P ROPOSED EPIDEMIC MODEL II
The proposed model can be extended from various aspects.
One such extension is to separate the recoveries from expo-
sure from the recoveries from infection. The advantage of
this separation is that in practice, the subjects that recov er
without any symptoms may only be identiﬁed by broad public
screening, which is not very practical for a large populatio n.
While the infected individuals that recover are already kno wn
for the healthcare system and are easy to monitor. Based on
this idea, the proposed extension of the model is as shown
in Fig. 6. Accordingly, the variables i(t), p(t) and ri(t)
(the recoveries from infection) are the variables that can b e
7Cf. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spanish ﬂu
observed and reported by the healthcare units. The dynamic
system corresponding to this model is:
Model II:
ds(t)
dt = −αes(t)e(t) − αis(t)i(t) + γere(t) + γiri(t)
de(t)
dt = αes(t)e(t) + αis(t)i(t) − κe(t) − ρe(t)
di(t)
dt = κe(t) − βi(t) − µi(t)
dre(t)
dt = ρe(t) − γere(t)
dri(t)
dt = βi(t) − γiri(t)
dp(t)
dt = µi(t)
(45)
subject to s(t)+e(t)+i(t)+re(t)+ri(t)+p(t) = 1 , which can
again be used to reduce the model order by omitting one of
the model variables (e.g., s(t)). In the latter case, we assume
that the observed variables are I(t), Ri(t) and P (t), resulting
in the following observation model:


I(t)
Ri(t)
P (t)

 =


0 1 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 0
0 0 0 0 1




e(t)
i(t)
re(t)
ri(t)
p(t)


+


vi(t)
vr(t)
vp(t)

 (46)
which can be written in compact form, as in ( 30).
Similar to the ﬁrst model, under the assumption of low
fraction of infection (during epidemic outbreak) and omitt ing
the variable s(t), ( 45) simpliﬁes to:


de(t)
dt
di(t)
dt
dre(t)
dt
dri(t)
dt
dp(t)
dt


≈


αe − κ − ρ α i 0 0 0
κ −β − µ 0 0 0
ρ 0 −γe 0 0
0 β 0 −γi 0
0 µ 0 0 0




e(t)
i(t)
re(t)
ri(t)
p(t)


(47)
Deﬁning the state vector x(t) = [ e(t), i(t), re(t), ri(t), p(t)]T ,
(47) can be written in a matrix form similar to ( 35), where
A is now the 5 ×5 state matrix on the right hand side of ( 47)
and solved for an arbitrary initial condition. The characte ristic
function of this linear system is:
|λI−A| = λ(λ+γe)(λ+γi)[λ2+(β+µ−δ)λ−δ(β+µ)−καi]
(48)
where as in the ﬁrst model δ
∆
= (αe − κ − ρ), resulting in the
following eigenvalues:
λ1 = δ − β − µ +
√
(δ + β + µ)2 + 4καi
2
λ2 = δ − β − µ −
√
(δ + β + µ)2 + 4καi
2
λ3 = 0, λ 4 = −γe, λ 5 = −γi
(49)
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 12
s e i p
re
ri
β
κ
ρ
αee + αii
γe
γi
µ
Fig. 6. Proposed Model II: an extension of the fatal SEIR mode l for
Coronavirus modeling, with separate recovery groups from e xposure and
infection
In this case, the eigenvectors corresponding to each eigenv alue
are:
v1 = k1[1, λ1 − δ
αi
, ρ
λ1 + γe
, β(λ1 − δ)
αi(λ1 + γi) , µ(λ1 − δ)
αiλ1
]T
v2 = k2[1, λ2 − δ
αi
, ρ
λ2 + γe
, β(λ2 − δ)
αi(λ2 + γi) , µ(λ2 − δ)
αiλ2
]T
v3 = [0, 0, 0, 0, k3]T , v4 = [0, 0, k4, 0, 0]T
v5 = [0, 0, 0, k5, 0]T
(50)
where k1, k2, k3, k4 and k5 are arbitrary constants. The
ﬁrst three eigenvalues are identical to Model I. Therefore, the
outbreak properties such as exposure/infection rates, sta bility
conditions and reproduction number are exactly the same as
the ﬁrst model, as derived in ( 40), ( 41), and ( 42).
V. E PIDEMIC TREND ESTIMATION , MODEL OBSERVABILITY
AND CONTROL
The ability to estimate the future trend of the epidemic
pattern is extremely important from the strategic perspect ive.
This requires the accurate estimation of the compartmental
model variables from reported statistics of the virus sprea d.
The trend estimation requirements are addressed in the sequ el
for both the linearized and general form of both of the
proposed models. As noted before, these results can be used
to design an estimation scheme, based on for example a
Kalman ﬁlter, for estimation and prediction of the current
and future trends, in presence of inaccurate infection toll s.
Note that although the variable e(t) is not directly measurable
from the available public data, one may seek whether of
not this variable can be indirectly estimated from the other
measurements (assuming that the other model parameters are
known).
A. Observability during outbreak (low fraction of infectio n)
During the epidemic outbreak (in the low fraction of infec-
tion case), the linearized versions of Model I and Model II,
namely ( 34) and ( 47) hold, respectively. Using the notion of
observability from system theory [ 26], [ 27], for the model
matrix pair (A, C) the observability matrix is deﬁned as
follows:
Ok =


Ck
CkAk
...
CkAn− 1
k

 (51)
If Ok has rank n (the number of state variables, in either of
the proposed models), all the state variables of the lineari zed
models ( 34) and ( 47) are observable at the outputs, which
means that they can be estimated from the observations in
ﬁnite time. It is straightforward to numerically calculate (51)
for arbitrary choices of the model parameters of Model I and
Model II, and to check that none of its columns are linearly
dependent8. Therefore, all the state variables, including e(t),
are observable and may be estimated using state estimation
techniques such as the Kalman ﬁlter (as the optimal linear
estimator).
B. Observability in the general case
In the general case, where the number of exposed/infected
cases exceeds several percents of the population, the varia tions
in s(t) is no longer negligible and one should refer to the
original nonlinear compartmental models ( 27) and ( 45). In
this case, the observability rank test ( 51) can be checked for
the matrix pair (A(t), C), where the matrix C is similar
to the linearized case in ( 29) and A(t) is the Jacobian
of the nonlinear model ( 28), with respect to the entries of
the reduced state-vector x(t) = [ e(t), i(t), r(t), p(t)]T . The
entries of the Jacobian have been listed in Appendix A; some
of which are time-dependent. Due to the non-evident form of
the observability matrix of this case, the proof of observab ility
of the matrix pair (A(t), C) in its general case is cumbersome.
However, it is simple to check this property numerically for
arbitrary values of the model parameters. We have tested thi s
property for our later shown simulated results, as part of th e
source codes provided online at [ 7]. Therefore, we can state the
following result in both the general and linear approximate d
case:
Result 7. Although the number of exposed cases
of the population is not directly measurable, if the
model parameters are known (or accurately esti-
mated), the number of exposed cases can also be
estimated from the other observations.
C. Epidemic control and model controllability
The proposed Models I and II, do not have external inputs.
Therefore, without changing the model parameters, there is no
control mechanism for the epidemic and one may only verify
the conditions under which the system is internally stable ,
i.e., the effect of epidemic outbreaks would vanish, remain
bounded, or result in an exponential outbreak. However, in-
terventions such as social distancing, quarantine, medica tion,
vaccination, etc., can be considered as control inputs that
change the model parameters.
VI. M ODEL PARAMETER IDENTIFICATION IN FIXED AND
SOCIALLY CONFINED SCENARIOS
An important step in making the proposed model useful
in practice is to ﬁt its parameters on real data. As noted
8Matlab has a function called obsv for calculating the observability matrix,
from the matrix pair (A, C).
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 13
before, the general compartmental model in ( 5) depends on
the parameter vector θ (t), which is generally time dependent
(relies on social contact, hygiene, etc.). In order to ﬁt the model
parameters various methods are available in the literature . We
study two approaches, which can be applied to our problem
of interest.
A. Constrained least squares parameter estimation
A general formulation for parameter identiﬁcation is to
use constrained weighted least squares (CWLS) estimation.
This approach becomes equivalent to the maximum likelihood
estimate, if the measurement noises belong to speciﬁc famil ies
of probability distributions (such as the Gaussian distrib ution).
Nevertheless, the CWLS is more generic as it only attempts
in ﬁnding the parameter vector that minimizes a quadratic
error cost function between the model and measurements
(without any probabilistic priors on the origin of the model
or measurement noises). We can speciﬁcally refer to the
CWLS formulation proposed in [ 28] and other prior research,
which have been speciﬁcally developed for nonlinear dynami c
models. Accordingly, for the general dynamic model ( 5), if we
deﬁne the modeling error function
e(t)
∆
= y(t) − g(x(t); θ (t), t), (52)
assuming temporarily that the model parameters θ (t) = θ
are ﬁxed, the problem of parameter identiﬁcation can be
formulated as follows:
ˆθ = argmin
θ
tr E[e(t)We(t)T ]
subject to:
θmin ≤ θ ≤ θmax,
˙x(t) = f (x(t), w(t); θ , t), x(0) = x0
(53)
Where E(·) denotes averaging over time, tr(·) denotes matrix
trace, θmin and θmax deﬁne the lower and upper bounds of
the model parameters dictated by physical constraints, and W
is the inverse of the covariance matrix of the measurement
noise vector v(t) (if available; otherwise can be set to identity
for an unweighted version). This problem is in the form
of nonlinear CWLS for which a variety of stable numerical
solvers exist. Refer to [ 28] for a survey of methods and [ 29,
Ch. 5] for methods speciﬁc to dynamic systems. In ( 53), since
the temporal averaging is performed over all time samples,
the procedure is only applicable to ofﬂine model ﬁtting. Now
if θ (t) is time variant, an adaptive version of the above
algorithm can be used, by averaging the error cost function
over t0 ≤ τ ≤ t, resulting in a sample-wise updates of the
parameter vector. In the following subsection, we propose a n
alternative approach for the time variant case, which is mor e
ﬂexible, does not require nonlinear least-squares solvers , and
simultaneously estimates the model state variables.
B. An extended Kalman ﬁlter for joint parameter and variable
estimation
A well-known method for adaptive estimation of dynamic
system parameters is to consider the (possibly) time-varyi ng
parameters of the model as additional state variables with
presumed dynamics and to estimate them at the same time
or in parallel with the original state vector. For this, let
us assume that all the parameters of our base epidemic
model ( 27) are time-variant, resulting in the parameter vector
θ (t) = [ αi(t), αe(t), κ(t), β(t), ρ(t), µ(t), γ(t)]T , that should
be estimated from real-world epidemic data. From the mod-
eling perspective, this vector can have some deterministic or
stochastic ﬂuctuations. For example, let us assume that the
model parameters are a simple Wiener process (Brownian mo-
tion) plus deterministic inputs to model social interventi ons:
dαi(t)
dt = uα i(t) + wi(t) dαe(t)
dt = uα e(t) + we(t)
dκ(t)
dt = uκ (t) + wκ (t) dβ(t)
dt = uβ (t) + wβ (t)
dρ(t)
dt = uρ (t) + wρ (t) dµ(t)
dt = uµ (t) + wµ (t)
dγ(t)
dt = uγ (t) + wγ (t)
(54)
where w(t) = [ wi(t), we(t), wκ (t), wβ (t), wρ (t), wµ (t), wγ (t)]T
is zero-mean white noise acting as process noise , and
uα i(t) and uα e(t) are the deterministic inputs due to social
intervention that change the level of social contact (consi dered
for modeling the effect of social distancing and quarantine ).
For example, the effect of lockdown applied at time t = t0
can be modeled by combinations of functions of the form:
uα i(t) = ai − bie− ci(t− t0)u(t − t0)
uα e(t) = ae − bee− ce(t− t0)u(t − t0) (55)
where ci and ce deﬁne the speed of lockdown application,
and ai, bi, ae and be deﬁne the range of lockdown effect. The
effect of lockdown termination can be modeled in a similar
manner. In any case, as detailed in Appendix A, the above
dynamics can be state augmented with the compartmental
model dynamics in ( 27) and ( 29) to form an augmented model,
which can be tracked using an extended Kalman ﬁlter (EKF).
The implementation of an EKF requires the Jacobian matrix
of the state augmented model with respect to all the elements
of the augmented state vector ˜x(t)
∆
= [x(t); θ (t)] (where ; de-
notes column-wise stacking), as detailed in the appendix. T he
details of the EKF is beyond the scope of the current study,
which is focused on the modeling aspects of the problem.
Nevertheless, the algorithmic steps of the discretized ver sion
of the compartmental model are presented in Appendix B.
An implementation of the EKF for epidemic model parameter
and state vector tracking will be provided online in the Git
repository of the project [ 7]. The interested reader is referred
to classical textbooks for the required signal processing a nd
algorithmic details of the EKF and its extensions [ 30, Ch. 5
and 6], [ 17], [ 31, P . 191], [ 32, Appendix 9.A and 9.B].
Note that a great advantage of using the EKF for estimat-
ing the model states and parameters is that in addition to
estimating the values, it also provides conﬁdence intervals
for the estimates (which is an advantage of all Bayesian
inference/estimation methods). In other words, under the g iven
assumptions on the process and measurement noise statistic s,
one can for example determine how accurate the number
of infected and exposed cases have been estimated. In the
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 14
context of interest, such conﬁdence intervals permit healt hcare
strategists to have an idea about the accuracy of the estimat ed
values and appropriate timing for lockdown and quarantine
management.
VII. S IMULATED RESULTS
We have carried-out several simulations with different set s
of parameters, resulting in the different scenarios explai ned in
previous sections.
Example 4 (Life-time immune case) . The ﬁrst scenario is
illustrated in Fig. 7, where we have considered a single virus
outbreak in a 84 million population, with constant paramete rs
αe = 0 .65, αi = 0 .005, κ = 0 .05, ρ = 0 .08, β = 0 .1, µ =
0.02 and γ = 0, simulated over one year. The assumption γ =
0 implies that the disease has been assumed to develop lifetim e
immunity, therefore there is no return from the recovered to
the susceptible compartment. In Fig. 7, we can observe the
constant ratio between i(t) and e(t) during the exponential
outbreak (when i(t) ≪ s(t) and before reaching the nonlinear
phase of the model), which approves the relationship derive d
in ( 44).
Example 5 (Recurrent epidemic) . The second scenario is
illustrated in Fig. 8. All the model parameters are identical
to Example 4, except for the re-susceptibility rate (loss of
immunity) that is now γ = 0 .001. It is interesting to see that
in this scenario, the model has recurrent decaying peaks ove r
time, similar to the aforementioned 1918 Spanish ﬂu.
Example 6 (Short lockdown period) . The next scenario is
illustrated in Fig. 9. This scenario corresponds to the case
where a one month lockdown is applied by the government
to identify the exposed and infected cases. The parameters
of the model before quarantine are αe = 0 .6, αi = 0 .005,
κ = 0.05, ρ = 0.08, β = 0.1, µ = 0.02 and γ = 0.001. In the
30th day after the initial outbreak, the one month lockdown i s
applied, during which αe and αi are reduced to 0.1 and 0.001,
respectively, while keeping the other parameters unchange d.
After one month, αi remains 0.001 (people keep distance with
the infected ones), but αe is increased to 0.4 (much more
than the quarantine period, but two-third of the original so cial
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
days
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Population Ratio
S(t)
E(t)
I(t)
R(t)
P(t)
0 20 40
0
0.1
0.2
I(t)/E(t)
Fig. 7. Scenario A: Simulation of the fatal SEIR model with pa rameters
α e = 0 . 65, α i = 0 . 005, κ = 0 . 05, ρ = 0 . 08, β = 0 . 1, µ = 0 . 02
and γ = 0 , over 10 months. Notice the constant i(t)/e (t) ratio during the
exponential outbreak, which is approximately equal to α i ˜λ − 1
1 = 0. 078.
0 50 100 150
days
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Population Ratio
S(t)
E(t)
I(t)
R(t)
P(t)
(a) in ﬁve months
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
days
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Population Ratio
S(t) E(t) I(t) R(t) P(t)
(b) in ten years
500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
days
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05Population ratio
I(t)
E(t)
(c) I(t) and E(t) in ten years
Fig. 8. Scenario B: Simulation of the fatal SEIR model with pa rameters α e
= 0.65, α i = 0.005, κ = 0. 05, ρ = 0.08, β = 0.1, µ = 0.02, γ = 0.001, in (a)
ﬁve months and (b, c) ten years
contact factor). We can see that with this scenario, which
corresponds to an insufﬁcient quarantine period, the popul ation
of the infected and exposed peaks have decreased; but the
quarantine does not signiﬁcantly change the mortality toll after
ﬁve months. But why? Because, after the quarantine period,
there is still a minor fraction of the population that is expo sed,
and this very small seed can re-initiate the virus spread. We
therefore come to the following result:
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 15
Result 8. Imposing quarantines is effective in de-
laying and reducing the infection population peaks;
but is insufﬁcient in the long term. Social distancing
and other measures should remain for a long period
after the initial quarantine, to make the number of
contaminated subjects equal to “zero. ”
0 50 100 150
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5Population ratio
I1(t)
E1(t)
I2(t)
E2(t)
0 50 100 150
days
0
0.05Population ratio
P1(t)
P2(t)
Quarantine
starts
Quarantine
ends
Fig. 9. Scenario C: Simulation of the fatal SEIR model with a q uarantine
period between day 30 and 60. E1(t), I1(t) and P 1(t) correspond to the
case without quarantine and E2(t), I2(t) and P 2(t) correspond to the case
with quarantine. Refer to the text for further details and th e switching of the
parameters.
Example 7 (Healthcare system saturation) . Our next scenario
corresponds to the case where the healthcare system reaches
its maximum capacity or break-point, due to limited test
kits, medication, hospitalization, excessive fatigue or m ortality
of the healthcare personnel, economic breakdowns, etc. Thi s
phenomenon is the worst feared case for pandemic strategist s
and it can be modeled at various levels. Suppose that we
model it in its simplest form and assume that the recovery
and mortality rates of the model change as functions of the
number of infected cases:
β(t) = ( βs − β0)h(i(t)) + β0
µ(t) = ( µs − µ0)h(i(t)) + µ0
(56)
where β0 and µ0 are the recovery and mortality rate parameters
before healthcare system saturation, βs (βs ≪ β0) and µs
(µs ≫ µ0) are the recovery and mortality rates after saturation,
and h(i(t)) is a saturation function such that h(0) ≈ 0 and
h(∞) ≈ 1. For example, the hyperbolic tangent with a slope
parameter σ is a reasonable and common choice for modeling
such phenomena:
h(i) = 1
2 [1 + tanh ( i − i0
σ )] (57)
where i0 is the infection break-point of the healthcare system.
The above choice is also beneﬁcial for parameter optimizati on
and tracking, due to the smoothness and differentiability o f the
hyperbolic tangent function.
A simulation of this scenario is illustrated in Fig. 10. The
parameters of the model are αe = 0.6, αi = 0.005, κ = 0.05,
ρ = 0 .08, and γ = 0 .001. The healthcare system breakdown
parameters are β0 = 0 .1, µ0 = 0 .02, βs = 0 .01, µs = 0 .2,
σ = 1 , i0 = 0 .1 (although in reality, the healthcare system is
expected to reach its breakpoint far below this infection ra te).
We can observe how the death rate signiﬁcantly increases as
the system reaches its break-point.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15Population ratio
i1(t)
i2(t)
0
0.5
1
Population ratio
r1(t)
r2(t)
0 50 100 150 days
0
0.1
0.2Population ratio
p1(t)
p2(t)
Healthcare system
breakdown infection level
Fig. 10. Scenario D: Simulation of the fatal SEIR model when t he healthcare
system reaches its breakdown point at i(t) = 0 . 1. The curves i1(t), r1(t),
and p1(t) are the non-saturated cases and i2(t), r2(t), and p2(t) correspond
to the saturated cases.
Based on the simulations of this section, we can propose a
protocol that can be effective in practice:
Algorithm 1 Proposed protocol for effective epidemic disease
control
1: Apply maximum lockdown of the entire population and
quarantine of the infected cases, as soon as possible.
2: Estimate the number of exposed subjects and the level of
conﬁdence of the estimate.
3: Keep the maximal lockdown until as many of all the
number of estimated exposed subjects are identiﬁed at a
very high level of conﬁdence.
4: Switch from lockdown to strict social distancing and
personal hygiene protocols.
5: Switch to normal life only when no new cases have been
reported for a long period.
VIII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study we considered some of the properties of
epidemic diseases from a mathematical and signal processin g
perspective, by using a compartmental model for the propa-
gation of the epidemic disease. It was shown that the model
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 16
is not stable around its ﬁxed-point (the no-infection case) . We
should indeed be proactively worried about the instability of
our societies to such epidemic outbreaks; since a fatal viru s
with an initial seed as small as a single subject worldwide ca n
trigger the avalanche of pandemic waves, killing many peopl e
worldwide, as the COVID-19 Coronavirus has shown. Note
however that from the modeling and dynamics perspective,
there is nothing speciﬁc to the Coronavirus, apart from its
speciﬁc parameters. In fact, humans have always been living in
such a metastable condition and researchers from all domain s
need to synergize to think a way through this condition.
The research will be continued and extended from var-
ious aspects in the future versions. Speciﬁcally, by ﬁtting
the model over real data, the prediction of infection and
mortality rates under quarantine and vaccination, and the s tudy
of the recurrent pattern of the epidemic disease over time.
Non-exponential law infection distributions have also bee n
considered in the literature [ 14]. This can be an interesting
track of research for the study of epidemic diseases, includ ing
the family of Coronaviruses.
APPENDIX
A. Compartmental Model Jacobians
Following (28) and the Wiener process model for the model
parameters presented in ( 54), the most general form of the
proposed compartmental model with time-varying parameter s
is as follows
de(t)
dt = [1 − e(t) − i(t) − r(t) − p(t)][αe(t)e(t) + αi(t)i(t)]
−κ(t)e(t) − ρ(t)e(t)
di(t)
dt = κ(t)e(t) − β(t)i(t) − µ(t)i(t)
dr(t)
dt = β(t)i(t) + ρ(t)e(t) − γ(t)r(t)
dp(t)
dt = µ(t)i(t)
dαi(t)
dt = dui
dt (t) + wi(t) dαe(t)
dt = due
dt (t) + we(t)
dκ(t)
dt = wκ (t) dβ(t)
dt = wβ (t) dρ(t)
dt = wρ (t)
dµ(t)
dt = wµ (t) dγ(t)
dt = wγ (t)
(58)
If we deﬁne the variable and parameter augmented state vecto r:
x(t)
∆
= [ e(t), i(t), r(t), p(t),
αi(t), αe(t), κ(t), β(t), ρ(t), µ(t), γ(t)]T (59)
which can be written in the compact state-space form ( 5). The
Jacobian of this form is deﬁned
A(t)
∆
= ∂f (·)
∂x ∈ R11× 11 (60)
with the following non-zero entries (we have dropped the tim e
index of all variables and parameters for better readabilit y):
A1, 1 = αe[1 − 2e − i − r − p] − αii − κ − ρ
A1, 2 = αi[1 − e − 2i − r − p] − αee
A1, 3 = −[αee + αii] A1, 4 = −[αee + αii]
A1, 5 = i[1 − e − i − r − p] A1, 6 = e[1 − e − i − r − p]
A1, 7 = −e A1, 9 = −e
A2, 1 = κ A2, 2 = −β − µ
A2, 7 = e A2, 8 = −i A2, 10 = −i
A3, 1 = ρ A3, 2 = β A3, 3 = −γ
A3, 8 = i A3, 9 = e A3, 11 = −r
A4, 2 = µ A4, 10 = i
(61)
B. The extended Kalman ﬁlter algorithm
Ofﬁcial epidemic data are commonly reported on a daily or
weekly bases. Therefore, the measurements used for model
variable and parameter estimation are discrete time, while
the compartmental model proposed throughout this work is
continuous. As a result two approaches are available for
implementing an EKF: 1) to use continuous-discrete Kalman
ﬁlters, which mix continuous state equations with discrete
measurement equations, or 2) to discretize the dynamic mode l
of the system and to implement a discrete EKF. The formula-
tion for the latter approach is detailed in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 An extended Kalman ﬁlter for simultaneous
compartment variable and model parameter tracking
Input: Noisy measurements (regular reports) of the
epidemic spread yk
Input: Initial conditions: Q, R, ˆx+
0 , P+
0
Output: ˆx+
k (vector of state and model parameter estimates)
1: for k = 0 · · ·T do
2: State prediction:
3: ˆx−
k+1 = f ( ˆx+
k , ¯w; ˆθ +
k , k∆)
4: P−
k+1 = A+
k P+
k A+T
k + Q
Measurement update:
5: Kk = P−
k C− T
k [C−
k P−
k C− T
k + R]− 1
6: ˆy−
k = g( ˆx−
k ; ˆθ −
k , k∆)
7: ik = yk − ˆy−
k
8: ˆσ +
k = ˆσ −
k + Kkik
9: P+
k = [I − KkC−
k ]P−
k
10: Check and enforce variable and parameter ranges
using hard-constraints
11: Performance monitoring
12: end for
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This article has been drafted in March 2020, in the midst
of the COVID-19 Coronavirus outbreak. The author would
like to sincerely thank Professor Christian Jutten, Emerit us
Professor of Universit´ e Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France, for
his insightful and motivating comments throughout this stu dy.
<<<PAGE>>>
DRAFT VERSION, SUBJECT TO MODIFICA TION. FOLLOW THE UPDA TES FROM: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11371 17
REFERENCES
[1] O. Diekmann, H. Heesterbeek, and T. Britton, Mathematical tools for
understanding infectious disease dynamics . Princeton University Press,
2012, vol. 7.
[2] F. Brauer, C. Castillo-Chavez, and C. Castillo-Chavez, Mathematical
models in population biology and epidemiology . Springer, 2012, vol. 2.
[3] J. Haefner, Modeling Biological Systems: Principles and Applications .
Springer, 2005.
[4] G. de Vries, T. Hillen, M. Lewis, B. Sch˜ onﬁsch, and J. Mul ler, A Course
in Mathematical Biology: Quantitative Modeling with Mathe matical and
Computational Methods , ser. Monographs on Mathematical Modeling
and Computation. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathem atics,
2006.
[5] W. Y ang, A. Karspeck, and J. Shaman, “Comparison of ﬁlter ing methods
for the modeling and retrospective forecasting of inﬂuenza epidemics,”
PLoS computational biology , vol. 10, no. 4, 2014.
[6] A. Azar, Control Applications for Biomedical Engineering Systems .
Elsevier Science, 2020.
[7] R. Sameni, Mathematical Modeling of Epidemic Diseases , 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/rsameni/EpidemicModeling.git
[8] J. Ottesen, M. Olufsen, and J. Larsen, Applied Mathematical Models
in Human Physiology , ser. Monographs on Mathematical Modeling and
Computation. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathemati cs, 2004.
[9] K. P . Burnham and D. R. Anderson, “Multimodel inference: understand-
ing aic and bic in model selection,” Sociological methods & research ,
vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 261–304, 2004.
[10] F. De Ridder, R. Pintelon, J. Schoukens, and D. P . Gillik in, “Modiﬁed
aic and mdl model selection criteria for short data records, ” IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement , vol. 54, no. 1, pp.
144–150, 2005.
[11] T. Britton, “Stochastic epidemic models: a survey,” Mathematical bio-
sciences, vol. 225, no. 1, pp. 24–35, 2010.
[12] L. Pellis, F. Ball, and P . Trapman, “Reproduction numbe rs for epidemic
models with households and other social structures. I. Deﬁn ition and
calculation of R0,” Mathematical biosciences , vol. 235, no. 1, pp. 85–
97, 2012.
[13] J. C. Miller, “Distribution of outbreak sizes for sir di sease in ﬁnite
populations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05138 , 2019.
[14] Z. Feng, D. Xu, and H. Zhao, “Epidemiological models wit h non-
exponentially distributed disease stages and application s to disease
control,” Bulletin of mathematical biology , vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 1511–
1536, 2007.
[15] V . C. Rideout, Mathematical and Computer Modeling of Physiological
Systems. Prentice Hall, 1991.
[16] B. Ingalls, An Introduction to Mathematical Modelling in Molecular
Systems Biology . Department of Applied Mathematics, University of
Waterloo, 2012.
[17] M. S. Grewal and A. P . Andrews, Kalman Filtering: Theory and Practice
Using Matlab , 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2001.
[18] R. M. Anderson and R. M. May, “Population biology of infe ctious
diseases: Part i,” Nature, vol. 280, no. 5721, pp. 361–367, 1979.
[19] R. M. May and R. M. Anderson, “Population biology of infe ctious
diseases: Part ii,” Nature, vol. 280, no. 5722, pp. 455–461, 1979.
[20] H. W. Hethcote, “The mathematics of infectious disease s,” SIAM review,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 599–653, 2000.
[21] K. Dietz, “Transmission and control of arbovirus disea ses,” Epidemiol-
ogy, vol. 104, pp. 104–121, 1975.
[22] J. C. Kamgang and G. Sallet, “Computation of threshold c onditions
for epidemiological models and global stability of the dise ase-free
equilibrium (dfe),” Mathematical biosciences , vol. 213, no. 1, pp. 1–
12, 2008.
[23] P . V an den Driessche and J. Watmough, “Reproduction num bers and
sub-threshold endemic equilibria for compartmental model s of disease
transmission,” Mathematical biosciences , vol. 180, no. 1-2, pp. 29–48,
2002.
[24] Z. Feng, “Final and peak epidemic sizes for seir models w ith quarantine
and isolation,” Mathematical Biosciences & Engineering , vol. 4, no. 4,
p. 675, 2007.
[25] S. Gonc ¸alves, G. Abramson, and M. F. Gomes, “Oscillati ons in sirs
model with distributed delays,” The European Physical Journal B ,
vol. 81, no. 3, p. 363, 2011.
[26] T. Kailath, Linear Systems . Prentice Hall, 1980.
[27] W. J. Terrell, Stability and stabilization: an introduction . Princeton
University Press, 2009.
[28] A. G´ abor and J. R. Banga, “Robust and efﬁcient paramete r estimation
in dynamic models of biological systems,” BMC systems biology , vol. 9,
no. 1, p. 74, 2015.
[29] D. P . Moeller, Mathematical and computational modeling and simula-
tion. Springer, 2003.
[30] S. Haykin, Ed., Kalman Filtering and Neural Networks . John Wiley
& Sons Inc., 2001.
[31] A. Gelb, Ed., Applied Optimal Estimation . MIT Press, 1974.
[32] A. Jazwinski, Stochastic Processes and Filtering Theory , ser. Mathemat-
ics in Science and Engineering. Elsevier Science, 1970.